docs: add Travel Wise overview and data model. (#29)
flatland-association/flatland-book: resources/travelwise.md

# Travel Wise

The goal of the [Travel Wise project](https://travelwise-project.eu/) is to improve intermodal coordination and common situational awareness to enable seamless travel across transport modes.

These core ideas will be implemented in Flatland to enable the simulation of Travel Wise sceanrios:

- Multimodality: move from trains-only to other modes of transport (busses, airplanes, ships and ferries, ...)
- Passenger journey: agents can also be people travelling from A to B potentially using multiple modes of transportation
- Graph representation: move from the grid-world to a graph-world in a two-layered representation of an infrastructure-graph and a passenger-graph

## Introduction

> The Flatland framework represents a systemic view of a given infrastructure map which is used for dispatching and (re-)routing of trains. With the Travel Wise extensions, a travellers point of view as well as multimodal travel is introduced. With these extensions the concept of connecting trains and other modes of transportation is introduced alongside new terminology explained in the table below.

Author: ```suggestion
The Flatland framework represents a systemic view of a given infrastructure map which is used for dispatching and (re-)routing of trains. With the Travel Wise extensions, a traveller's point of view as well as multimodal travel is introduced. With these extensions the concept of connecting trains and other modes of transportation is introduced alongside new terminology explained in the table below.
```

|-----------|-------------|
| journey   | A journey is a travel from point A to point B using potentially different modes of transportation. |
| Itinerary | The itinerary describes the planned route (space and time) for a given journey. The initial itinerary might be updated during the scenario according to a given metric (default: shortest time). |
| Transfer  | Each change of mode of transportation is a transfer, even if the mode is the same, e.g. from one train to another. |

## High-Level Description

The Travel Wise extensions to the Flatland framework enable to simulate passenger journeys using multiple (different) modes of transportation with corresponding transfers between the different legs of the journey. On such a journey, different milestones are passed. Passing these milestones triggers  communication with a top-layer. This communication layer is the Travel Wise solution (cf. [Travel Wise project](https://travelwise-project.eu/)) and is above and outside Flatland. Travel Wise extensions to Flatland include definition of milestones, the information collected at these events and an implementation to send out these messages to the external layer.

> These extensions are realized using a graph representation of the **infrastructure** as a **ground level**. On this level, the agents are trains, buses, plains, etc. (*walkway* is also considered a mode of transportation). As a first implementation, the agent on this level run regardless of passengers and other cargo.

Author: ```suggestion
These extensions are realized using a graph representation of the **infrastructure** as a **ground level**. On this level, the agents are trains, buses, plains, etc. (*walkway* is also considered a mode of transportation). As a first implementation, agents on this level run "on auto-pilot" and have no notion of passengers/capacity and other cargo.
```

> On the **passenger level**, the agents are groups of people (N=1..n) referred to as *passenger*. Each passenger has its own passenger graph on this level. Each passenger graph corresponds to a subgraph of the infrastucture graph (see below). While the infrastructure graph does not change in a given scenario, the passenger graph does change according to available options for their journey.

Author: Is this still true?
> the passenger graph does change according to available options for their journey.

Reviewer: no -> removed

![Two Layers](./travelwise/two-layers.drawio.png)

A passener, therefore, *hops on* a vehicle running on the infrastructure layer. On each node of the graph where a transfer is possible (stations, stops, airports,...) the passenger *hops back up* and *sees* the possible paths on its own graph. 

### Environments

The infrastructure layer corresponds to a generalized version of the `RailEnv`, i.e. a graph representation with different transportation modes, which is a property of the edges. An edge that can only be travelled by foot, i.e. walkway, is also included in the infrastructure graph.

> The passenger layer is represented as a `PassengerEnv` where all properties correspond to those of the `RailEnv`, but the `PassengerEnv` depends on an existing `RailEnv` to be generated. The following table provides an overview of the properties.

Author: ```suggestion
The passenger layer is represented as a `PassengerEnv` where all properties correspond to those of the `RailEnv` (i.e., inheritance in OO terms), but the `PassengerEnv` depends on an existing `RailEnv` to be generated. The following table provides an overview of the properties.
```

> | `RailEnv` | description | `PassengerEnv` | description |

Reviewer: this table still needs some additions (including formatting)
especially: do we have/need a name for the "rail" on the passengerenv?

|--------------|-------------|--------------|-------------|

> | rail | graph consisting of nodes and multimodal edges | ... | (the graph is a subgraph of the infrastructure graph) |

Author: If each agent has its own subgraph, then its only correspondence, right?
```suggestion
| rail | graph consisting of nodes and multimodal edges | ... | (the graph corresponds to a subgraph of the infrastructure graph) |
```

| line | list of stations that are served successively | journey | two points (origin and destination) that are connected through the graph |

> | timetable | list of time windows (latest arrival, earliest departure) for a given line | initial itinerary | list of specific modes of transport creating a viable path from origin and destination taking into account their timetables |

Author: So the initial itinerary comes from timetable generator and is relevant for rewards, right? (We might need a more general term for timetable generator, such as demand generator; similarly, infrastructure/supply generator instead of rail generator and something else for line...).

Reviewer: yes, that's right

> | action   | generalized version of the railway case actions, including *move to edge a1*, *accelerate*, *brake* | action | in principle, there are the same actions, however, in practice there is only *move to edge a1* since the passenger agents leave their graph as soon as they *hop on* a vehicle (they still exist, but refer to their vehicle in the environment state) |

Author: Note that we need a larger action space if we allow degree > 2.

> | observation | conventional `RailEnv` observations, e.g. tree observation| observation | global observation of the infrastructure graph and timetables;  |

Author: passenger observation might be list of itineraries to choose from?

> | observation | conventional `RailEnv` obsercvations, e.g. tree observation| observation | global observation of the infrastructure graph and timetables;  |

Author: ```suggestion
| observation | conventional `RailEnv` observations, e.g. tree observation| observation | global observation of the infrastructure graph and timetables;  |
```

| effects  | triggers for milestones can be e.g. delayed trains, trains passing a specific node, ... | effects | triggers for milestones can be passenger specific, e.g. *my* train is delayed, ... |
| malfunction | includes breakdowns, departure delays, ... | - | so far, there are no malfunctions planned in this env |

### Goals

The goal is to be able to simulate passenger journeys for a given scenario. A scenario includes both infrastructure with conditinal paths, i.e. edges on the infrastructure graph and schedules with optionally additional data.

### Use Cases

The general use cases are listed here. The Travel Wise scenarios from the project are listed below.

- Generate messages at milestones for a given infrastructure and journey.
- Create an itinerary for a passenger journey for a given infrastructure.
- Update an existing itinerary after a malfunction or delay using a given metric (default: shortest time).

### Data

The data needed to run a scenario:

- Infrastructure

> - Optional paths and the conditions under which they can be used

Author: > Optional paths

needs clarification.

Reviewer: added examples

- Schedules of all modes of transportation
- Passenger journeys

Optional data for additional use cases:

- Capacities of (some) modes of transportation
- Additional infrastructure elements

### Requirements Simulation Model

Both layers need a controller and a policy under which the controller can act. The policies are different for the two layers. While on the infrastructure layer the policy is supposed to keep the system running, in the passenger layer it is responsible for finding the optimal itinerary for the passenger. Optimal can be different things, though. Examples include

- shortest time,
- fewest transfers,
- longer transfer times (e.g. for passengers with reduced mobility)

and can include instructions to, e.g., not update the itinerary at every decision point but only if the passenger is not able to stick to the initial itinerary.

## Travel Wise Scenarios

> There are tree Travel Wise scenarios where the first one is split into two parts.

Author: ```suggestion
There are three Travel Wise scenarios where the first one is split into two parts.
```

1. **City Pair - Paris-Amsterdam**: Two international airports connected by plane or high-speed train (of wich most connections go trough Brussels).

>     - Both paris and Amsterdam are regarded as subscenarios connecting the airport with the interregional train station.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Both Paris and Amsterdam are regarded as subscenarios connecting the airport with the interregional train station.
```

2. **International Hub - Athems**: Airport connected via train, bus and metro with port.
3. **Regional Airport - Bologna**: Airport connected via a monorail with interregional train station and city center.

![Three Travel Wise Scenarios](./travelwise/travel_wise_scenarios.png)

### Data

In addition to the data needed for a general scenario (described above), a Travel Wise scenario also needs:

- Milestones

#### Qualitatively

> #### Quantiatively ballpark numbers

Author: ?

### Scientific Questions

> - What is the impact of a disruption and what are its cascading effects?

Author: How is the impact evaluated? Are there metrics? What is the deliverables for this question?

Reviewer: some metrics added -> more might arise from the people responsible for the TW scenario

> - For a given disruption, is it worthwile to make alternative routes available for passengers

Author: dito

# Travel Wise

The goal of the [Travel Wise project](https://travelwise-project.eu/) is to improve intermodal coordination and common situational awareness to enable seamless travel across transport modes.

These core ideas will be implemented in Flatland to enable the simulation of Travel Wise sceanrios:

- Multimodality: move from trains-only to other modes of transport (busses, airplanes, ships and ferries, ...)
- Passenger journey: agents can also be people travelling from A to B potentially using multiple modes of transportation
- Graph representation: move from the grid-world to a graph-world in a two-layered representation of an infrastructure-graph and a passenger-graph

## Introduction

The Flatland framework represents a systemic view of a given infrastructure map which is used for dispatching and (re-)routing of trains. 

## High-Level Description

> The Travel Wise extensions to the Flatland framework enable to simulate passenger journeys using multiple (different) modes of transportation with corresponding transfers between the different legs of the journey. On such a journey, different milestones are passed, meaning a form of communication with a top-layer (which is above and outside Flatland) is extablished. This communication layer is the Travel Wise solution (cf. [Travel Wise project](https://travelwise-project.eu/)).

Author: ```suggestion
The Travel Wise extensions to the Flatland framework enable to simulate passenger journeys using multiple (different) modes of transportation with corresponding transfers between the different legs of the journey. On such a journey, different milestones are passed. Passing these milestones triggers  communication with a top-layer. This communication layer is the Travel Wise solution (cf. [Travel Wise project](https://travelwise-project.eu/)) and is above and outside Flatland. Travel Wise extension to Flatland include definition of milestones, the information collected at these events and an implementation to send out these events to the external layer.
```

Reviewer: changed

These extensions are realized using a graph representation of the **infrastructure** as a **ground level**. On this level, the agents are trains, buses, plains, etc. (*walkway* is also considered a mode of transportation). As a first implementation, the agent on this level run regardless of passengers and other cargo.

> On the **passenger level**, the agents are groups of people (N=1..n) referred to as *passenger*. Each passenger has its own passenger graph on this level which is a subgraph of a projection of the infrastucture graph (see below).

Author: ```suggestion
On the **passenger level**, the agents are groups of people (N=1..n) referred to as *passenger*. Each passenger has its own passenger graph on this level. Each passenger graph corresponds to a subgraph of the infrastucture graph (see below).
```

Reviewer: changed

> On the **passenger level**, the agents are groups of people (N=1..n) referred to as *passenger*. Each passenger has its own passenger graph on this level which is a subgraph of a projection of the infrastucture graph (see below).

Author: @CleverManu Is it a subgraph or a correspondence involving time as well, see open questions below?

![Two Layer](./travelwise/two-layers.png)

> A passener, therefore, *moves* down to the infrastructure graph to move along edges. On each node of the graph where a transfer is possible (stations, stops, airports, ...) the passenger hops back up and *sees* the possible paths on its own graph.

Author: @CleverManu 
* "Moves down" would suggest that the infrastructure layer is aware of the passenger? Rather the passenger hops on vehicle running in the infrastructure and does not need/cannot take any action while on the vehicle?
* "and sees" implies that at this point the passenger graph is updated? I think it's essential to mention that the passenger graphs evolve while the infrastructure graph is static.

Reviewer: rewritten

### Goals

> The goal is to be able to simulate passenger journeys for a given scenario. A scenario includes both infrastructure with conditinal paths and schedules with optinally additional data.

Author: ```suggestion
The goal is to be able to simulate passenger journeys for a given scenario. A scenario includes both infrastructure with conditinal paths and schedules with optionally additional data.
```

Reviewer: fixed

### Use Cases

The general use cases are listed here. The Travel Wise scenarios from the project are listed below.

- Generate messages at milestones for a given infrastructure and journey.
- Create an itinerary for a passenger journey for a given infrastructure.

> - Update an existing itinerary after a malfunction or delay using a given metric (default: shortest time).

Author: Passenger journey and itinerary need to be defined.

Reviewer: added terminology above

- 

### Data

> The data needed:

Author: @CleverManu Maybe differentiate between the data needed in general in the project and the input data for a simulation run (what defines a scenario)? Seems like a mixture of both?

- Infrastructure

> - Optional routes and the conditions under which they can be used

Author: Unclear: routes in which sense?

Reviewer: changed to path (already used before)

- Schedules of all modes of transportation
- Example journeys for different passengers

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- Example journeys for different passengers
- Milestones

```

Reviewer: added for Travel Wise scenarios

# Travel Wise

The goal of the [Travel Wise project](https://travelwise-project.eu/) is to improve intermodal coordination and common situational awareness to enable seamless travel across transport modes.

These core ideas will be implemented in Flatland to enable the simulation of Travel Wise sceanrios:

- Multimodality: move from trains-only to other modes of transport (busses, airplanes, ships and ferries, ...)
- Passenger journey: agents can also be people travelling from A to B potentially using multiple modes of transportation
- Graph representation: move from the grid-world to a graph-world in a two-layered representation of an infrastructure-graph and a passenger-graph

## Introduction

> The Flatland framework represents a systemic view of a given infrastructure map which is used for dispatching and (re-)routing of trains. With the Travel Wise extensions, a travellers point of view as well as multimodal travel is introduced. With these extensions the concept of connectiong trains and other modes of transportation is introduced alongside new terminology explained in the table below.

Author: ```suggestion
The Flatland framework represents a systemic view of a given infrastructure map which is used for dispatching and (re-)routing of trains. With the Travel Wise extensions, a travellers point of view as well as multimodal travel is introduced. With these extensions the concept of connecting trains and other modes of transportation is introduced alongside new terminology explained in the table below.
```

Reviewer: fixed

| term      | description |
|-----------|-------------|

> | journey   | A journey is a travel from point A to point B using potentially different modes of transportation. |

Author: Did we not want to include earliest departure latest arrival to make it compatible with Flatland timetables?

Reviewer: it has to be compatible with Line, so there is no need to add an element of time here

> | Itinerary | The itinerary describes the planned route for a given journey. The initial itinerary might be updated during the scenario according to a given metric (default: shortest time). |

Author: route in space or route in space and time?

Reviewer: added
